
ANTHROPOLOGY 

TEXT FROM SLIDES

Peruvian Markets: A Context for Understanding Social Inequality in Peru

1.  Ethnicity (ethnic identity)
2.  Race 
3.  Class
4.  Ethnicity, race and class in Peru: historical antecedents 
5.  Conversations in the marketplace 
6.  Nationalism and hegemony

Ethnicity (ethnic identity)

    A sense of collective identity based on an idea of shared descent (geographical origin) and cultural patterns (language, religion…).  

    A relational category: contextually activated/defined in the presence of “others”, hence ethnicity is fluid (e.g. highland indigenous peoples in Ecuador).

    While ethnicity is fluid, though, rigid constructions of ethnic difference, and mistaken constructions of ethnic superiority lead to ethnic discrimination (contempt for the members of an ethnic group).  This is a form of ethnocentrism.   

    In the context of discrimination, ethnic assimilation is encouraged, resulting in pressure to accommodate to a dominant ethnic group. 


RACE 

    A notion based on the belief that there are discontinuous biological differences among humans.

    Problematic because it lacks empirical proof: it is based on the selection of arbitrary phenotypical attributes assumed to be markers of full biological distinctiveness. This ignores the complex relations between the human genotype and its phenotypical expressions (e.g. Joe and Nancy’s family).   

    What matters to anthropologists, then, is how social relations are structured around (misled) notions of racial difference. 

    Hypodescent in the US.
    Racial fluidity in Brazil.

    Race is notoriously powerful in drawing inequalities, because of the assumption that it is “natural” (therefore unquestioned).

    The social construction of race in different contexts:  Pelé (mother “Black”, father “Black”) became White in Brazil as he acquired fame and wealth.  Ex-president Obama (mother “White”, father “Black”) is Black in the US.


CLASS 

    A form of identification/social affiliation based on individuals’ unequal access to various forms of privilege.

    Marx: a socio-economic category.

    Weber: class broken down into status and wealth.

    Bourdieu:  a confluence of social, economic and cultural capital.  Class cultures allow recognition across the class spectrum.  


Ethnicity, Race and Class in Peru: Historical antecedents

    Spanish colonialism: many efforts to create fixed racial categories (e.g. the casta system).

    Labels such as “chola” came out of the difficulty of assigning a category to “ambiguous” indigenous subjects (e.g. urban indigenous women).

    “Chola”/mestizo/indigenous/white… are relational, fluid, categories (contextually activated).  

    Race in the Andes has been talked about as an “accumulation of effects” (Weismantel) that produce “artificial” physical difference (yet socially meaningful). 

    Colonial Spanish “casta system”, a method for classifying those of mixed ancestry.

    Observe the intricacy of labels (next slide) and how clothing and demeanor, more than skin color, define the status of members of different castas. Distinctions are relational.

    The basic casta system categories


Conversations in the marketplace

    Market women navigate ethnic, racial and class structures in different ways (embracing them, challenging them, giving them new meanings).

    Internal stratification of the market itself reveals the complexity and fluidity of these structures.


Conversations in the marketplace: the invisible structure.
    Language and verbal skills

    Etiquette and protocols

    Conversation driven by assumptions about the interlocutor’s ethnic/racial/class status

    Race/ethnicity/class categories reflect a continuum, yet, in any given conversation among non-equals one assumes the “whiter” role and the other one is expected to assume the subordinate one.  This structure is often contested by vendors, though.

    Verbal confrontations target geographical and ethnic origin, gender, sexual orientation and practices, and occupation.

    Vendors use racial/class/gender categories, but also challenge them and redefine them.
